वेदैस्सर्वाणि कर्माण्यफलपरतया वर्णितानीति बुध्वा
तानि त्वय्यर्पितान्येव हि समनुचरन् यानि नैष्कर्म्यमीश ।
मा भूद्वेदैर्निषिद्धे कुहचिदपि मन:कर्मवाचां प्रवृत्ति-
र्दुर्वर्जं चेदवाप्तं तदपि खलु भवत्यर्पये चित्प्रकाशे ॥१॥
वेदै:-सर्वाणि कर्माणि-	by the Vedas all the rituals
अफल-परतया	beyond their results
वर्णितानि-इति बुध्वा	are described, so understanding
तानि त्वयि-अर्पितानि-एव	all of them, to Thee dedicating only
हि समुचरन्	(may I) perform them
यानि नैष्कर्म्यम्-ईश	(so that I) may achieve freedom from action O Lord!
मा भूत्-	may there not be
वेदै:-निषिद्धे	by the Vedas forbidden (actions)
कुहचित्-अपि	at all any
मन:-कर्म-वाचाम्	by thought deed or speech
प्रवृत्ति:-दुर्वर्जम्-	inclination, if unavoidable
चेत्-अवाप्तम्	may they get
तत्-अपि खलु	that also indeed
भवति-अर्पये	I will dedicate to Thee
चित्प्रकाशे	O Light of Consciousness!
Understanding that the rituals described in the Vedas are beyond their seeming results-oriented nature, I shall dedicate all such rituals that I perform, to Thee O Lord! And become free from the bondage of action. May I not, even by mistake, by thought deed or speech attempt to do what is forbidden by the Vedas. If any such action becomes unavoidable, that too I will dedicate to Thee alone, O The Glowing Light of Consciousness!
यस्त्वन्य: कर्मयोगस्तव भजनमयस्तत्र चाभीष्टमूर्तिं
हृद्यां सत्त्वैकरूपां दृषदि हृदि मृदि क्वापि वा भावयित्वा ।
पुष्पैर्गन्धैर्निवेद्यैरपि च विरचितै: शक्तितो भक्तिपूतै-
र्नित्यं वर्यां सपर्यां विदधदयि विभो त्वत्प्रसादं भजेयम् ॥२॥
य:-तु-अन्य: कर्मयोग:-	that indeed the other (form of) ritualistic yoga
तव भजनमय:-तत्र च	(which is) of Thy devotion, there also
अभीष्ट-मूर्तिं	Thy form dear to me
हृद्यां सत्त्व-एक-रूपां	in my heart, (the form) of pure Sattva
दृषदि हृदि मृदि	(in an image of) stone, in the heart, or of clay
क्वापि वा भावयित्वा	or of any other material, invoking
पुष्पै:-गन्धै:-निवेद्यै:-	with flowers, incense and food offerings
अपि च विरचितै:	also making
शक्तित: भक्तिपूतै:-	according to my capacity, with pure devotion
नित्यं वर्यां सपर्यां	everyday devoted worship
विदधत्-अयि विभो	performing O Lord!
त्वत्-प्रसादं भजेयम्	Thy grace will seek
The other form of ritualistic Karma, (Aagama) where Thy devotion is propounded, following that, I will worship Thee everyday. The dear most pure Saatvic form of Thee I will invoke in my heart as an image of stone or clay or any other material and worship with offerings of flowers, incense and food, according to my capacity. O Lord! devotedly performing Thy worship, I will seek Thy grace.
स्त्रीशूद्रास्त्वत्कथादिश्रवणविरहिता आसतां ते दयार्हा-
स्त्वत्पादासन्नयातान् द्विजकुलजनुषो हन्त शोचाम्यशान्तान् ।
वृत्त्यर्थं ते यजन्तो बहुकथितमपि त्वामनाकर्णयन्तो
दृप्ता विद्याभिजात्यै: किमु न विदधते तादृशं मा कृथा माम् ॥३॥
स्त्री-शूद्रा:-	women and people of lower castes
त्वत्-कथा-आदि-	Thy deed's narration etc.,
श्रवण-विरहिता:-	of hearing deprived (unprivileged)
आसतां ते दयार्हा:-	may they be sympathised with
त्वत्-पाद-आसन्न-यातान्	to Thy feets' proximity reaching
द्विजकुल-जनुष: हन्त	(those of) higher caste people, alas
शोचामि-अशान्तान्	I pity, (for) they are unpeaceful
वृत्त्यर्थं ते यजन्त:	(because) for a livelihood (they) perform Yagyaas
बहु-कथितम्-अपि	in spite of being told many times
त्वाम्-अनाकर्णयन्त:	(they) to Thee (Thy teachings) do not hear (adhere to)
दृप्ता: विद्या-अभिजात्यै:	arrogant (because of) learning and high birth
किमु न विदधते	what (misdeeds) do they not do
तादृशं	like that
मा कृथा माम्	(Thou) may not make me
Women and people of the lower social order are unprivileged to hear the narrations of Thy deeds and excellences and for chanting Thy names. They are indeed to be pitied. But I bemoan the unpeaceful lot of people of the higher castes, who in spite of having all the facilities of worshipping Thee, would not do so being arrogant of their learning and high birth. In Thy teachings they have been repeatedly instructed about Thee, they perform Yagyaas as a livelihood and for material ends, and there is no misdeed that they do not do. O Lord! I pray, do not make me one like them.
पापोऽयं कृष्णरामेत्यभिलपति निजं गूहितुं दुश्चरित्रं
निर्लज्जस्यास्य वाचा बहुतरकथनीयानि मे विघ्नितानि ।
भ्राता मे वन्ध्यशीलो भजति किल सदा विष्णुमित्थं बुधांस्ते
निन्दन्त्युच्चैर्हसन्ति त्वयि निहितमतींस्तादृशं मा कृथा माम् ॥४॥
पाप:-अयं-कृष्ण-राम-	wicked is this Krishna and Raama
इति-अभिलपति	thus keeps saying
निजं गूहितुं दुश्चरित्रं	his own, to conceal misconduct
निर्लज्जस्य-अस्य वाचा	by this shameless person's prattles
बहुतर-कथनीयानि मे	very many things that I wanted to say
विघ्नितानि	are hindered (could not be said)
भ्राता मे वन्ध्यशील:	my brother is a hypocrite
भजति किल सदा विष्णुम्-	and worships indeed always Vishnu
इत्थं बुधान्-ते	in this manner, the wise devoted to Thee
निन्दन्ति-उच्चै:-हसन्ति	of them, speak spitefully and laugh loudly
त्वयि निहित-मतीन्	in Thee absorbed are whose minds
तादृशं मा कृथा माम्	like that (those people) do not make me
Those worldly undevoted people laugh loudly at the wise people who are devoted to Thee with their minds absorbed in Thee. They speak spitefully of them with statements like -'This is a wicked fellow and keeps saying Krishna and Raama to conceal his misconduct. Because of this person's shameless prattles, I could not say many important things. My brother is an hypocrite and feigns to worship Vishnu all the time.' O Lord! Do not make me like them.
श्वेतच्छायं कृते त्वां मुनिवरवपुषं प्रीणयन्ते तपोभि-
स्त्रेतायां स्रुक्स्रुवाद्यङ्कितमरुणतनुं यज्ञरूपं यजन्ते ।
सेवन्ते तन्त्रमार्गैर्विलसदरिगदं द्वापरे श्यामलाङ्गं
नीलं सङ्कीर्तनाद्यैरिह कलिसमये मानुषास्त्वां भजन्ते ॥५॥
श्वेत-च्छायं कृते	white and lustrous in Krita Yuga
त्वां मुनिवरवपुषं	Thou, in the form of a sage
प्रीणयन्ते तपोभि:-	propitiated by meditating men
त्रेतायां	in the Treta Yuga
स्रुक्-स्रुव-आदि-अङ्कितम्-	Sruka and Sruva etc., bearing marks
अरुण-तनुं	with a red body
यज्ञरूपं यजन्ते	(Thou) in the form of Yagya,are offered sacrifices
सेवन्ते तन्त्र-मार्गै:-	worship as per Taantric rites
विलसत्-अरि-गदं	adorning sword and mace
द्वापरे श्यामल-अङ्गम्	in the Dwaapara Yuga, (Thee as) the light blue bodied
नीलं सङ्कीर्तन-आद्यै:-	(Thee) with blue (complexion) by chanting (Thy names) etc.,
इह कलि-समये	here in the Kali Yuga
मानुषा:-त्वां भजन्ते	people, Thee worship
In the Krita Yuga people propitiate Thee with penance, in the form of a lustrous white sage. In the Treta Yuga, people offer sacrifices to Thee in the form as the Yagya itself, red in complexion marked with Sruka and Sruva (the Yaagyic accessories). According to the Taantric rites and rituals, in the Dwaapara Yuga, people worship Thee with a blue complexion resplendent with mace and discus etc. In this Kali Yuga Thou with a blue complexion are worshipped by people, with the chanting of Thy various names.
सोऽयं कालेयकालो जयति मुररिपो यत्र सङ्कीर्तनाद्यै-
र्निर्यत्नैरेव मार्गैरखिलद न चिरात्त्वत्प्रसादं भजन्ते ।
जातास्त्रेताकृतादावपि हि किल कलौ सम्भवं कामयन्ते
दैवात्तत्रैव जातान् विषयविषरसैर्मा विभो वञ्चयास्मान् ॥६॥
स:-अयं कालेय-काल:	that this is the Kali Yuga Kaala
जयति मुररिपो	may it be victorious, O Slayer of Mura!
यत्र सङ्कीर्तन-आद्यै:-	where by chanting etc., only
निर्यत्नै:-एव मार्गै:-	without effort, alone, ways
अखिलद न चिरात्-	O Fulfiller of All Desires! Without delay
त्वत्-प्रसादं भजन्ते	Thy grace is achieved
जाता:-त्रेता-कृत्-आदौ-अपि	(those) born in Treta Krita etc also
हि किल कलौ	indeed in Kali
सम्भवं कामयन्ते	to be born, desire
दैवात्-तत्र-एव जातान्	fortunately, therein only born (we)
विषय-विष-रसै:-	by sensuous poisonous sense enjoyments
मा विभो वञ्चय-अस्मान्	Do not, O Lord! Deprive us
O Slayer of Mura! That this Kali Yuga may be victorious, wherein by chanting Thy various names and glories alone Thy grace is achieved effortlessly and in no time. O Fulfiller of All Desires! Those born in Treta Krita Dwaapara also desire to be born indeed in Kali Kaala. Fortunately, those of us who are born now, in Kali, may we not O Lord! be deprived of Thy grace, because of the pursuit of poisonous sensuous sense enjoyments.
भक्तास्तावत्कलौ स्युर्द्रमिलभुवि ततो भूरिशस्तत्र चोच्चै:
कावेरीं ताम्रपर्णीमनु किल कृतमालां च पुण्यां प्रतीचीम् ।
हा मामप्येतदन्तर्भवमपि च विभो किञ्चिदञ्चद्रसं त्व-
य्याशापाशैर्निबध्य भ्रमय न भगवन् पूरय त्वन्निषेवाम् ॥७॥
भक्ता:-तावत्-कलौ	devotees, then, in Kaliyuga
स्यु:-द्रमिल-भुवि	will be in Dravid land
तत:-भूरिश:-	from them most
तत्र च-उच्चै::	and there are also, largely (in areas of)
कावेरीं ताम्रपर्णीम्-	(the rivers) Kaaveri, Taamraparni,
अनु किल कृतमालां	and then indeed Kritmaalaa
च पुण्यां प्रतीचीम्	towards the holy west
हा माम्-अपि-	Oh! me also
एतत्-अन्तर्भवम्-अपि	in this area born only
च विभो	and O Lord!
किञ्चित्-अञ्चत्-रसं त्वयि-	somewhat devotion to Thee (having)
आशा-पाशै:-निबध्य	in the ropes of desire, binding
भ्रमय न भगवन्	delude, do not O God!
पूरय त्वत्-निषेवाम्	make complete, towards Thee my devotion
In the Kali Yuga devotees will abound, mostly in the Dravid land, i.e., South India. In the regions of the rivers Kaaveri, Taamraparni and the Kritamaalaa, the holy west, the devotees will be more. Oh Lord! I too am born in this region only, and have some devotion to Thee. O God! I pray, do not delude me by binding me with ropes of desire, and do make my devotion to Thee complete.
दृष्ट्वा धर्मद्रुहं तं कलिमपकरुणं प्राङ्महीक्षित् परीक्षित्
हन्तुं व्याकृष्टखड्गोऽपि न विनिहतवान् सारवेदी गुणांशात् ।
त्वत्सेवाद्याशु सिद्ध्येदसदिह न तथा त्वत्परे चैष भीरु-
र्यत्तु प्रागेव रोगादिभिरपहरते तत्र हा शिक्षयैनम् ॥८॥
दृष्ट्वा धर्मद्रुहं तं	seeing the enemy fo Dharma, him
कलिम्-अपकरुणं	Kaliyug the merciless Kali
प्राक्-महीक्षित् परीक्षित्-	once the king Pareekshit
हन्तुं व्याकृष्ट-खड्ग:-अपि	to kill, drew his sword also
न विनिहितवान्	(but) did not kill (Kali)
सारवेदी गुण-अंशात्	the knower of the essence of Truth, (Kali) having some good
त्वत्-सेवा-आदि-	worship of Thee etc.,
आशु-सिद्ध्येत्-	will bring results soon,
असत्-इह न तथा	evil here, will not in the same manner (bring results)
त्वत्-परे च-एष भीरु:-	to Thy devotees and he (Kali) is afraid
यत्-तु प्राक्-एव	because, before that only (firm devotion)
रोग-आदिभि:-अपहरते	by disease etc., he takes away
तत्र हा	here (for this) Oh!
शिक्षय-एनम्	do punish him
Once king Pareekshit saw the merciless Kali who is the enemy of Dharma (righteousness), and to kill him, he drew his sword also. But he did not kill Kali, because Kali is a knower of the essence of Truth, and also because it has some good features. In Kali, Thy worship bears results very soon where as evil deeds take time to bring fruits. Kali is also afraid of Thy devotees, so he tries to take them away by disease etc., even before their devotion becomes firm. For this O Lord! punish him.
गङ्गा गीता च गायत्र्यपि च तुलसिका गोपिकाचन्दनं तत्
सालग्रामाभिपूजा परपुरुष तथैकादशी नामवर्णा: ।
एतान्यष्टाप्ययत्नान्यपि कलिसमये त्वत्प्रसादप्रवृद्ध्या
क्षिप्रं मुक्तिप्रदानीत्यभिदधु: ऋषयस्तेषु मां सज्जयेथा: ॥९॥
गङ्गा गीता च	Gangaa (the river Ganges) Geetaa (the holy text)
गायत्री-अपि च	Gaayatri (Gaayatri Mantra) also
तुलसिका	Tulsikaa (the holy plant)
गोपिका चन्दनं तत्	and that Gopikaa chandana (sandal paste)
सालग्राम-अभिपूजा	Saalagraam (Vishnu's icon) worship
परपुरुष	O Supreme Lord!
तथा-एकादशी	and Ekaadashi (the fast on the eleventh day of the fortnight)
नामवर्णा:	(and) chanting of Thy names
एतानि-अष्ट-अपि	these eight also
अयत्नानि-अयि	are effortless, O Thou!
कलि-समये	in the time of Kali Yuga
त्वत्-प्रसाद-प्रवृद्ध्या	by Thy grace in abundance
क्षिप्रं-मुक्ति-प्रदानी-इति-	quickly liberation gives, thus
अभिदधु:-ऋषय:-	have clearly stated the sages
तेषु मां सज्जयेथा:	in these (eight), make me devoted completely
O Supreme Lord! In this Kali Yuga, Gangaa, Geetaa, Gaayatri, Tulsika, Gopichandana, Saalagraama worship, Ekaadashi fast and chanting of Thy names, these eight, the sages say, are quick and effortless means of salvation as they secure Thy abounding grace. O Thou! May I be intensely devoted to them all.
देवर्षीणां पितृणामपि न पुन: ऋणी किङ्करो वा स भूमन् ।
योऽसौ सर्वात्मना त्वां शरणमुपगतस्सर्वकृत्यानि हित्वा ।
तस्योत्पन्नं विकर्माप्यखिलमपनुदस्येव चित्तस्थितस्त्वं
तन्मे पापोत्थतापान् पवनपुरपते रुन्धि भक्तिं प्रणीया: ॥१०॥
देवर्षीणां	of the gods (sages)
पितृणाम्-अपि	of the Pitris (Manes) also
न पुन: ऋणी	will not again be debtor
किङ्कर: वा स	a servant or he
भूमन्	O Lord of the Universe!
य:-असौ सर्वात्मना	whoever wholeheartedly
त्वां शरणम्-उपगत:-	in Thee refuge has taken
सर्व-कृत्यानि हित्वा	abandoning all actions
तस्य-उत्पन्नं विकर्म-अपि-	by him done misdeeds also
अखिलम्-अपनुदसि-एव	all of them are destroyed even
चित्त-स्थित:-त्वं	by Thee residing in his heart
तत्-मे पाप-उत्थ-तापान्	that by my sins' borne sufferings
पवनपुरपते	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
रुन्धि भक्तिं प्रणीया:	remove and generate devotion
O Lord of the Universe! Who so ever, whole heartedly takes refuge in Thee, abandoning all actions, is no longer a debtor to the gods or sages, Pitris (or Manes), or a servant to them. Even if he has done any misdeeds, they are destroyed by Thee who do reside in his heart. O Lord of Guruvaayur! my sufferings, born of my sins, do remove and generate devotion in me.